The role of satellite remote sensing in climate change studies

Abstract
Satellite remote sensing has provided major advances in understanding the climate system and its changes, by quantifying processes and spatio-temporal states of the atmosphere, land and oceans. In this Review, we highlight some important discoveries about the climate system that have not been detected by climate models and conventional observations; for example, the spatial pattern of sea-level rise and the cooling effects of increased stratospheric aerosols. New insights are made feasible by the unparalleled global- and fine-scale spatial coverage of satellite observations. Nevertheless, the short duration of observation series and their uncertainties still pose challenges for capturing the robust long-term trends of many climate variables. We point out the need for future work and future systems to make better use of remote sensing in climate change studies.
Main
Observational data and model simulations are the foundations of our understanding of the climate system1. Satellite remote sensing (SRS) — which acquires information about the Earth's surface, subsurface and atmosphere remotely from sensors on board satellites (including geodetic satellites) — is an important component of climate system observations. Since the first space observation of solar irradiance and cloud reflection was made with radiometers onboard the Vanguard-2 satellite in 19592, SRS has gradually become a leading research method in climate change studies3.
The use of satellites allows the observation of states and processes of the atmosphere, land and ocean at several spatio-temporal scales. For instance, it is one of the most efficient approaches for monitoring land cover and its changes through time over a variety of spatial scales4,5. Satellite data are frequently used with climate models to simulate the dynamics of the climate system and to improve climate projections6. Satellite data also contribute significantly to the improvement of meteorological reanalysis products that are widely used for climate change research, for example, the National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis7. The Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) has listed 26 out of 50 essential climate variables (ECVs) as significantly dependent on satellite observations8. Data from SRS is also widely used for developing prevention, mitigation and adaptation measures to cope with the impact of climate change9.
Despite the aforementioned contributions of SRS, there are concerns about the suitability of satellite data for monitoring and understanding climate change10. Climate change studies require observations to be calibrated/validated and consistent, and to provide adequate temporal and spatial sampling over a long period of time11. However, satellite data often contain uncertainties caused by biases in sensors and retrieval algorithms, as well as inconsistencies between continuing satellite missions with the same sensors. The use of satellite observations in climate change studies requires a clear identification of such limitations.
In this Review we discuss the contribution of SRS to our understanding of climate change and the processes involved. We focus on SRS-enabled discoveries that have substantiated or challenged our fundamental knowledge of climate change. Our main goal is to reveal the unique contributions and major limitations of SRS as used in these studies. Technical details on instrumentation and retrieval methods can be found in a recent review12.
Global warming
The warming trend of the Earth's mean surface temperature since the late nineteenth century has provided evidence for anthropogenic influences on global climate13. This trend was first identified by analysing anomalies in time series of near-surface air temperature over the land that were recorded by weather stations14. However, the existence of the trend was consistently challenged due to the biases in weather records15 caused by such things as poor siting of the instrumentation and the influence of land-use/land-cover changes. Satellite data provides an independent way to investigate global temperature trends, particularly at the ocean surface and in the atmosphere.
The sea surface temperatures (SSTs) of the oceans — which are directly related to heat transfer between the atmosphere and oceans — serve as important indicators of the state of the climate system16. The Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer on board the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellites allows us to monitor the SST worldwide. An increase in SST has been observed in all ocean basins since the 1970s, with an average estimated increase of 0.28 °C from 1984 to 200617. This global trend is similar to that of the near-surface air temperature over land, thus providing a decisive corroboration of the warming identified from weather records, although the magnitude still has considerable uncertainty18. Satellite observations also reveal an uneven warming pattern. The ocean warming trend is highest in the middle latitudes of both hemispheres19, stronger east–west zonal SST gradients have been detected across the equatorial Pacific Ocean20. The regional variability of SST is closely linked with that of other climate parameters, such as precipitation21. All of these discoveries have led to a better understanding of the role of the oceans in influencing global climate.
Surface and tropospheric warming has been predicted as a major response of the climate system to escalating concentrations of greenhouse gases22, but initial analyses found no obvious trend in the tropospheric temperature records obtained using microwave sounding units (MSUs) on polar-orbiting satellites23 — a finding that has challenged both the reliability of surface temperature records and our understanding of the reaction of the climate system to increased greenhouse gas concentrations24. However, after removing known problems with the sensors, accounting for the influence of stratospheric cooling and reducing biases in retrieval methods25, new versions of satellite time series all show a warming trend in the troposphere, except in the Antarctic region26 (Fig. 2). This progress, together with improved climate models, has led to the conclusion that there is no fundamental disagreement between observed and modelled tropospheric temperature trends of warming (provided that uncertainties in both are accounted for)24. Nevertheless, some questions remain. The observed scaling ratio (that is, the ratio of atmospheric trend to surface trend) is still significantly lower than model projections27. The differences between observed temperatures in the tropical upper- and lower-middle troposphere are also significantly smaller than those simulated by climate models28. These remaining differences indicate that either model deficiencies or observational errors that were identified in previous studies have not been fully resolved.